State Department Trending Toward More Visa Interview Waivers - Valvo & Associates Payments | 日本語 About Us Our Attorneys Our Clients Services & Resources Temporary Work Visas Permanent Residence/Employer Sponsorship Permanent Residence/Family Sponsorship Strategic Planning/Compliance Naturalization Reserved for Future Law Changes Green Card Renewals Exchange Visitors (J-1) Fiancés of U.S. Citizens (K-1 and K-3 Visas) Re-Entry Permits Important Visa Concepts and Helpful Aids Permanent Residence/Family Sponsorship Naturalization Useful Links What’s New Contact Us State Department Trending Toward More Visa Interview Waivers As part of an ongoing effort to streamline visa application processes, the US State Department has adopted a visa interview waiver process originally introduced during the COVID-19 pandemic. The waiver for visa renewal interviews has now become a standard procedure for many US embassies and consulates after the change was formally adopted on January 1, 2024. We are particularly focused on the adoption of this policy for the US Embassy in Tokyo and the US Consulate in Osaka which is allow waivers for visa renewals and, in certain cases, initial visa interviews. The key, however, is putting together a thorough and compelling visa application to leverage this opportunity. Which First-Time Applicants are Eligible for Visa Interview Waivers? Starting January 1, 2024, the US introduced a waiver for in-person interviews for first-time visa applicants under specific conditions. Eligibility hinges on applicants being citizens of Japan (or another US Visa Waiver Program country) or a lawful foreign resident of Japan currently in the country. To qualify, individuals must have been previously interviewed and issued a US visa other than a B1/B2 visa. In applying for an interview waiver, first-time applicants must be applying for the following visa types: C1/D, F, I, M, J, H, O, P, Q or R visas. E visas – only if the US E company is already registered. L visas – Blanket L visa applicants may not apply by mail. Applicants must have a clean legal record and a visa that is valid or expired for less than 48 months without subsequent refusals. Who Is Eligible For Visa Interview Waivers for Renewals? Eligibility for this new interview waiver is extensive, but it’s important to make sure you actually fit the criteria before moving forward. For those seeking visa renewals, the conditions are fairly specific. First of all, your renewal application must be within the same category as the previous issuance which is either still valid or has expired within the last 48 months. Applicants must also not have had a previous US visa application denied since the last visa was issued. To qualify, individuals must be citizens or residents of Japan, applying from within the country, without a prior denial for an ESTA. The policy explicitly excludes nationals from the countries of Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, or Yemen. Furthermore, those whose previous visas carried the annotations “Clearance Received” or “Waiver Granted” are ineligible. Personal details like name, date of birth, and nationality in your current passport must match those in your previous visa. The following visa types are eligible for renewal without an interview if the above criteria are met: B1/B2 C1/D E (specifically if the US company is already registered with the consulate) F, M, or J H, O, P, Q, or R I Certain L visas (Blanket L visa applicants may not renew visas by mail) As noted, Blanket L visa applicants face different requirements and typically cannot renew their visas through the mail. However, there is hope elsewhere that could expand eligibility to these visa types. Potential Expansion to L-1 Visa Interview Waivers While the expansion of interview waivers has not yet included L-1 Blanket visas within Japan, the American Institute in Taiwan (AIT) recently implemented a policy to waive L-1 Blanket visa interviews. This may offer a glimpse into possible future developments for other countries, including Japan. The move by AIT sparks optimism for a broader application of these new visa interview waivers. Despite this positive trend, however, we are monitoring the upcoming 2024 US presidential election which could significantly influence the direction and pace of policy changes related to visa processing. The current administration’s efforts to clear the backlog of visa applications have been unprecedented, but a renewed Trump Administration would likely roll back many of these changes and implement more strict guidelines. Streamlined Visa Application Processes with Valvo & Associates In order to take full advantage of these changes, businesses and professionals in Japan need to work with an experienced immigration attorney who understands the recent changes. At Valvo & Associates, we gladly help our clients prepare the best application for their case to move forward without issue. With every case, we strive to underst